in 2008 Rohan Hassan age 17 boarded a
flight from Minneapolis to the Horn of
Africa and while berhan was the youngest
recruit he was not alone al-shabaab
managed to recruit over two dozen young
men in their late teens and early 20s
with a heavy presence on social media
platforms like Facebook with the
internet and other technologies they've
changed our everyday lives but they've
also changed recruitment radicalization
and the front lines of conflict today
what about the links connecting Twitter
Google and protesters fighting for
democracy these numbers represent
Google's public dns servers effectively
the only digital border crossing
protesters had and could use to
communicate with each other to reach the
outside world and to spread viral
awareness of what was happening in their
own country today conflict is
essentially borderless if there are
bounds to conflict today they're bound
by digital not physical geography and
under all this is a vacuum of power
where non-state actors individuals and
private organizations have the advantage
over slow outdated military and
intelligence agencies and this is
because in the digital age of conflict
there exists a feedback loop where new
technologies platforms like the ones I
mentioned and more disruptive ones can
be adapted learned and deployed by
individuals and organizations faster
than governments can react to understand
the pace of our own government thinking
on this I like to turn to something
aptly named the worldwide threat
assessment where every year the Director
of National Intelligence in the u.s.
looks at the global threat landscape and
he says these are the threats these are
the details and this is how we rank them
in 2007 there
absolutely no mention of cybersecurity
it took until 2011 when it came at the
end were other things like West African
drug trafficking precedent in 2012 it
crept up still behind things like
terrorism and proliferation in 2013 it
became the top threat in 2014 and for
the foreseeable future
with things like that show us is that
there is a fundamental inability today
on the part of governments to adapt and
learn in digital conflict where conflict
can be immaterial borderless often
wholly untraceable and conflict isn't
just online to offline as we see with
terrorist radicalization but it goes the
other way as well we all know the
horrible events that unfolded in Paris
this year with the Charlie Hebdo
terrorist attacks when an individual
hacker or a small group of anonymous
individuals did was enter those social
media conversations that so many of us
took part in hashtags yes we Charlie on
Facebook on Twitter on Google all sorts
of places where millions of people
myself included we're talking about the
events and saw images like this the
emotional poignant image of a baby was
just sweet Charlie on its wrist and this
turned into a weapon what the hackers
did was weaponize this image where
unsuspecting victims like all of us in
those conversations saw this image
downloaded it but it was embedded with
malware and so when you downloaded this
image it hacked your system it took six
days to deploy a global malware campaign
the divide between physical and digital
domains today ceases to exist where we
have offline attacks like those in Paris
appropriated for online hacks and it
goes the other way as well with
recruitment we see online radicalization
of teens who can then be deployed
globally for offline terrorist attacks
with all of this we see that there's a
new 21st century battle brewing and
governments don't necessarily take apart
so in another case anonymous versus Los
Zetas in early September two
eleven in Mexico los zetas one of the
most powerful drug cartels hung to
bloggers with a sign that said this is
what will happen to all internet
busybodies a week later they beheaded a
young girl they severed her head put it
on top of her computer with a similar
note and taking the digital
counter-offensive because governments
couldn't even understand what was going
on or act anonymous a group we might not
associate as the most positive force in
the world took action not in cyber
attacks but threatening information to
be free on social media they said we
will release information that ties
prosecutors and governor's to corrupt
drug deals with the cartel and
escalating that conflict
los zetas said we will kill ten people
for every bit of information you release
and so it ended there because it would
become too gruesome to continue but what
was powerful about this was that
anonymous individuals not federal
policia not military not politicians
could strike fear deep into the heart of
one of the most powerful violent
organizations in the world and so we
live in an era that lacks the clarity of
the past in conflict in who we're
fighting in the motivations behind
attacks in the tools and techniques used
and how quickly they evolve and a
question still remains what can
individuals organizations and
governments do for answers to these
questions
it starts with individuals and I think
peer-to-peer security is the answer
those people and relationships that
bought over teams online we can do that
with peer-to-peer security individuals
have more power than ever before to
affect national and international
security and when we can create those
positive peer-to-peer relationships on
and offline we can support and educate
the next generation of hackers like
myself instead of saying you can either
be a criminal or join the NSA that
matters today
and it's not just individuals it's
organizations corporations even they
have an advantage to act across more
borders more effectively and more
rapidly than governments can and there's
a set of real incentives there it's
profitable and valuable to be seen as
trustworthy in the digital age and will
only be more so in future generations to
come but we still can't ignore
government's because that's who we've
turned to for collective action to keep
us safe and secure but we see where
that's gotten us so far where there's an
inability to adapt and learn and digital
conflict where at the highest levels of
leadership director of the CIA secretary
of defense they say cyber Pearl Harbor
will happen cyber 9/11 is imminent but
this only makes us more fearful not more
secure by banning encryption in favor of
mass surveillance and mass hacking short
GCHQ and the NSA can spy on you but that
doesn't mean that they're the only ones
that can capabilities are cheap even
free technical ability is rising around
the world and individuals and small
groups have the advantage so today it
might just be the NSA and GCHQ but who's
to say that the Chinese can't find that
backdoor or another generation some kid
in his basement in Estonia and so I
would say that it's not what governments
can do it's that they can't government's
today need to give up power and control
in order to help make us more secure
giving up mass surveillance and hacking
and instead fixing those backdoors means
that yeah they can't spy on us but
neither can the Chinese or that hacker
in Estonia a generation from now and
government support for technologies like
Tor and Bitcoin mean giving up control
but it means the developers translators
anybody with an internet connection in
countries like Cuba Iran and China can
sell their skills their products in the
global marketplace but more importantly
sell their ideas show us
happening in their own countries and so
it should be not fearful it should be
inspiring to the same governments that
fought for civil rights free speech and
democracy and the great Wars of the last
century that today for the first time in
human history we have a technical
opportunity to make billions of people
safer around the world that we've never
had before in human history it should be
inspiring